Alternative proposal for a volume type standard (#453)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-0112-v1-volume-types.md

---
title: SCS Volume Types
type: Standard
status: Draft
track: IaaS
---

## Introduction

A volume is a virtual drive that is to be used by an instance (i. e., a virtual machine). With OpenStack,
each volume is created per a type that determines basic features of the volume as provided by the backend,

> such as encryption, replication, or quality of service. As of the writing of this document, none of these
> features can be discovered by non-privileged users via the OpenStack API.

Author: ```suggestion
such as encryption, replication, or quality of service. As of the writing of this document, presence or absence of these
features can not be discovered with full certainty by non-privileged users via the OpenStack API.
```

## Motivation

> As an SCS user, I want to be able to create volumes with certain common features, such as encryption or

Reviewer: I like this motivation. It is a big value added to a standard.

replication, and to do so in a standardized manner as well as programmatically.
This standard outlines a way of formally advertising these common features for a volume type to

> non-privileged users, so that the most suitable volume type can be discovered and selected easily--both by

Reviewer: Missing white spaces?

```suggestion
non-privileged users, so that the most suitable volume type can be discovered and selected easily -- both by
```

the human user and by a program.

## Possible features

The following features are recognized.

| name  | meaning  |
| :--    | :--  |
| `encrypted`  | volumes of this type are encrypted  |
| `replicated` | volumes of this type are replicated (at least threefold)  |

Further features may be added in the future, as outlined in detail in the [decision record regarding volume
types.](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/standards/blob/main/Standards/scs-0111-v1-volume-type-decisions.md)

## Advertising features

The features of a volume type MAY be advertised by putting a _feature list_ in front of its description.
A feature list has the following form:

> `[feat:`feat1,feat2,...,featN`]`

Reviewer: To separate from other approaches, I prefer an scs specific prefix, such as `scs-feat`.

where the entries (feat1, ..., featN) are sorted alphabetically, and each entry occurs at most once.

> ## Recommended volume types

Reviewer: Should we specify mandartory or recommenced properties of encryption, such as cipher and key size?

At least one volume type SHOULD feature encryption.

> At least one volume type SHOULD feature replicaton.

Reviewer: I prefer to add define requirements or recommendations for replication. I.e. how replication ins achieved and how many replicas exists.

> 

Reviewer: I suggest to add an example, like in #351 

```text
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Field              | Value                                                                                                                                                        |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| access_project_ids | None                                                                                                                                                         |
| description        | [scs:encrypted][scs:replicated] Content will be replicated three times to ensure consistency and availability for your data. LUKS encryption is used.        |
| id                 | d63307fb-167a-4aa0-9066-66595ea9fb21                                                                                                                         |
| is_public          | True                                                                                                                                                         |
| name               | hdd-three-replicas-LUKS                                                                                                                                      |
| properties         |                                                                                                                                                              |
| qos_specs_id       | None                                                                                                                                                         |
+--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
```
